\input texinfo
@c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename guile-debbugs.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@settitle Guile Debbugs Reference Manual
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2017 Ricardo Wurmus@*

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A
copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free
Documentation License''.
@end copying

@dircategory The Algorithmic Language Scheme
@direntry
* Guile-Debbugs: (guile-debbugs).      Guile bindings to Debbugs.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Guile Debbugs Reference Manual
@subtitle Accessing the Debbugs bug tracker with Guile
@author Ricardo Wurmus

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Edition @value{EDITION} @*
@value{UPDATED} @*

@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@c *********************************************************************
@node Top
@top Guile Debbugs

This document describes Guile Debbugs version @value{VERSION}, the Guile
bindings for the Debbugs bug tracker's SOAP service.

@menu
* Introduction::                What is this all about?
* Installation::                Installing Guile-Debbugs.
* Programming Interface::       Using Guile-Debbugs in Scheme.

* Acknowledgments::             Thanks!
* GNU Free Documentation License::  The license of this manual.
* Concept Index::               Concepts.
* Programming Index::           Data types, functions, and variables.
@end menu

@c *********************************************************************
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

This package provides a Guile library to communicate with a Debbugs bug
tracker's SOAP service.

Here is a short Guile REPL session demonstrating some of the things you
can do with this library:

@cindex example, REPL session
@lisp
(set! %load-path (cons "/path/to/guile-debbugs/" %load-path))
,use (debbugs soap)
,use (debbugs operations)
,use (debbugs bug)
,use (debbugs email)
(define %debian "http://bugs.debian.org/cgi-bin/soap.cgi")
(define %gnu "https://debbugs.gnu.org/cgi/soap.cgi")
(soap-invoke %debian newest-bugs 3)
$1 = (880882 880881 880880)
(soap-invoke %debian get-status $1)
$2 = (#<bug 880882 ...> #<bug 880881 ...> #<bug 880880 ...>)
(map bug-originator $2)
$3 = ("ringo" "paul" "george")
(soap-invoke %debian get-bug-log (car $1))
$4 = (#<email 1 ...> #<email 2 ...> #<email 3 ...>)
(email-body (car $4))
$5 = "Hello world! ..."
@end lisp

For documentation of the supported operations @xref{Operations}.


@c *********************************************************************
@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Guile Debbugs uses the GNU build system.  To install Guile Debbugs from
a release tarball just unpack it and run the usual commands:

@example
./configure
make
make install
@end example

If you want to build the sources from the source repository you need to
bootstrap the build system first.  Run the @code{bootstrap.sh} script
first and then perform the above steps.

@c *********************************************************************
@node Programming Interface
@chapter Programming Interface

Guile Debbugs provides rudimentary procedures to make requests to a SOAP
service, and it defines operations that can be invoked on it.  It does
not provide a full implementation of SOAP and it has only been tested
with Debbugs.

The following modules are included:

@table @code
@item (debbugs base64)
Procedures for decoding and encoding base64 strings.

@item (debbugs bug)
Procedures to parse bugs as returned by Debbugs, and to access their
properties.

@item (debbugs email)
Procedures to parse emails as returned by Debbugs.

@item (debbugs operations)
Implementations of SOAP operations supported by Debbugs.

@item (debbugs rfc822)
Parser for email headers.

@item (debbugs soap)
Procedures for talking with SOAP services.
@end table

The modules @code{(debbugs rfc822)} and @code{(debbugs base64)} won't be
documented here as they are primarily for internal use.

@menu
* SOAP helpers::           Procedures for talking with SOAP services.
* Operations::             Debbugs SOAP operations.
* Bug helpers::            Procedures for parsing bugs and accessing their properties.
* Email helpers::          Procedures for parsing emails and accessing their properties.
@end menu

@c *********************************************************************
@node SOAP helpers
@section SOAP helpers

@cindex (debbugs soap), module
The module @code{(debbugs soap)} provides procedures to invoke
operations on a SOAP service, to retrieve responses, and to convert
those responses to Scheme values.

@cindex soap-request, constructor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-request @var{body} [@var{callback}]
Return a @code{<soap-request>}, which combines a SOAP request envelope
enclosing the SXML expression @var{body} and the single-argument
response handler procedure @var{callback}.  The response handler is to
be called on the SOAP response SXML.  When no handler is provided the
response expression is not processed.
@end deffn

@cindex soap-request?, predicate
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-request? @var{record}
Return @code{#t} when @var{record} is a @code{<soap-request>} object.
@end deffn

@cindex soap-request-body, accessor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-request-body @var{request}
Return the SXML @code{body} of the SOAP request @var{request}, a
@code{<soap-request>} object.
@end deffn

@cindex soap-request-callback, accessor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-request-callback @var{request}
Return the response handler procedure @code{callback} of the SOAP
request @var{request}, a @code{<soap-request>} object.
@end deffn

@cindex make a SOAP request
@cindex invoke SOAP operation
@cindex send a request to a SOAP service
@cindex soap-invoke, procedure
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-invoke @var{uri} @var{op} [@var{args} @dots{}]
Invoke the SOAP operation @var{op}, a @code{<soap-request>} object, with
all provided arguments @var{args} on the SOAP service at the provided
URI @var{uri}.  Return the response body after processing it with the
handler procedure that is part of @var{op}.
@end deffn

@cindex convert XML response to Scheme
@cindex soap->scheme, procedure
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap->scheme @var{sxml} [@var{plain}]
Recursively convert a SOAP SXML expression @var{sxml} for a named value
to a Scheme value.  If @var{plain} is @var{#t} return only the value,
otherwise return a pair of a name and the value.
@end deffn

@c *********************************************************************
@node Operations
@section Operations

@cindex (debbugs operations), module
This module implements SOAP operations that can be used with a Debbugs
SOAP service.  Each of the procedures in this module returns a
@code{<soap-request>} value, i.e. a message in SXML format and an
optional response handler procedure.

@cindex newest-bugs, operation
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} newest-bugs @var{amount}
This operation returns the identifiers of the newest bugs as a list of
numbers.  The integer @var{amount} must be specified to limit the number
of bugs returned by Debbugs.
@end deffn

@cindex get-status, operation
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} get-status @var{bug-ids}
This operation returns @code{<bug>} records containing the details for
the bugs identified by @var{bug-ids}, a list of bug numbers.  @xref{Bug
helpers} for procedures that can be used on the return values.
@end deffn

@cindex get-bugs, operation
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} get-bugs @var{args}
This operation returns bug numbers for bugs that match the conditions
given by @var{args}, an alist of key-value pairs.  Possible keys are
@code{package}, @code{submitter}, @code{maint}, @code{src},
@code{severity}, @code{status}, @code{tag}, @code{owner}, @code{bugs},
@code{affects}, and @code{archive}.

All keys and values must be provided as strings.  Valid values for
@code{status} are the strings @code{done}, @code{forwarded}, and
@code{open}.  For @code{archive} the valid values are either the string
@code{both}, the string @code{1} (meaning ``archived''), or the string
@code{0} (meaning ``not archived'').
@end deffn

@cindex get-bug-log, operation
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} get-bug-log @var{bug-id}
This operation requests all emails associated with the bug identified by
@var{bug-id}.  All emails are returned as @code{<email>} values.
@xref{Email helpers} for procedures that can be used on the return
values.
@end deffn

@cindex get-usertag, operation
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} get-usertag @var{email}
This operation returns an association list of tag names (as strings) to
lists of bug numbers for all bugs that have been tagged by @var{email},
a string holding an email address.
@end deffn

@cindex search-est, operation
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} search-est @var{phrase} [@var{skip}] [@var{max}]
Return the result of a full text search according to the string
@var{phrase}.  When @var{skip} is provided, the given number of hits
will be skipped; this is useful for paged results.  At most @var{max}
results are returned when @var{max} is provided.  The number of returned
results is always limited by the absolute maximum returned by the
Debbugs server.

This operation may not be supported by all Debbugs instances.
@end deffn


@c *********************************************************************
@node Bug helpers
@section Bug helpers

@cindex (debbugs bug), module
Being a bug tracker, Debbugs tracks bugs.  Bugs are created and modified
through email messages, and Debbugs reveals the internal state that is
affected by these messages through the @code{get-status} operation.  The
Guile bindings parse the returned state to a value of the record type
@code{<bug>}.

@cindex soap-bug->bug, procedure
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-bug->bug @var{bug-item}
This procedure takes an SXML expression @var{bug-item}, which describes
the state of a single bug, and returns a record of type @code{<bug>}.
It is used to parse the SOAP response of the @code{get-status}
operation.  This is the only way to obtain a value of type @code{<bug>}.
@end deffn

@cindex bug?, predicate
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} bug? @var{record}
Return @code{#t} when @var{record} is a @code{<bug>} object.
@end deffn

@cindex bug accessor procedures
@cindex bug properties
Debbugs records a large number of properties for each bug.  For each of
these properties Guile Debbugs provides an accessor procedure, which
returns the parsed value.  In the table below the properties are
described.  Each property can be accessed with a procedure named
@code{bug-PROPERTY}, where @code{PROPERTY} is the property name.

@table @code
@cindex bug-package, accessor
@item package
The package to which this bug report applies.

@cindex bug-severity, accessor
@item severity
The severity of the bug report.

@cindex bug-num, accessor
@item num
The bug number, a unique numeric identifier.

@cindex bug-subject, accessor
@item subject
The current title of the bug report.

@cindex bug-summary, accessor
@item summary
An arbitrary summary text.

@cindex bug-msgid, accessor
@item msgid
The message ID of the email that caused the bug to be registered.

@cindex bug-originator, accessor
@item originator
The email address of the submitter of the bug report.

@cindex bug-owner, accessor
@item owner
The email address of the person assigned to fix this bug.

@cindex bug-done, accessor
@item done
The email address of the person who closed the bug.

@cindex bug-archived, accessor
@item archived
A boolean indicating whether the bug is archived.

@cindex bug-unarchived, accessor
@item unarchived
A boolean indicating whether the bug has been unarchived and can be
archived again.

@cindex bug-pending, accessor
@item pending
Either the string ``pending'' or the string ``done''.

@cindex bug-blocks, accessor
@item blocks
A list of bug numbers for bugs that are blocked by this bug.

@cindex bug-blockedby, accessor
@item blockedby
A list of bug numbers of bugs blocking this bug.

@cindex bug-mergedwith, accessor
@item mergedwith
A list of bug numbers for bugs that have been merged with this bug.

@cindex bug-affects, accessor
@item affects
A list of package names that are affected by this bug.

@cindex bug-date, accessor
@item date
The date and time when this bug was reported.

@cindex bug-log-modified, accessor
@item log-modified
The date and time when this bug was last modified.

@cindex bug-last-modified, accessor
@item last-modified
Honestly, I don't know what the difference is compared to @code{log-modified}.

@cindex bug-forwarded, accessor
@item forwarded
A URL or an email address.

@cindex bug-fixed-versions, accessor
@item fixed-versions
A list of version strings for versions of the affected package in which
the bug has been fixed.

@cindex bug-found-versions, accessor
@item found-versions
A list of version strings for versions of the package in which the bug
has been found.

@cindex bug-source, accessor
@item source
Source package of the bug report.

@cindex bug-outlook, accessor
@item outlook
Unknown.

@cindex bug-tags, accessor
@item tags
A list of tag strings.

@cindex bug-found, accessor
@item found
Apparantly this field is not fully implemented in Debbugs yet.

@cindex bug-location, accessor
@item location
In the Debian version of Debbugs this will always be ``db-h'' or ``archive''.
@end table


@c *********************************************************************
@node Email helpers
@section Email helpers

@cindex Email helpers
@cindex (debbugs email), module
Debbugs is an email-driven bug tracker---bug reports are created by
sending email and their state is updated by sending control messages.
Every bug has an associated message log, an ordered list of user-sent
emails and internal control messages.  The @code{(debbugs email)} module
provides the record type @code{<email>} that represents those email
messages.

@cindex soap-email->email, procedure
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} soap-email->email @var{email-item}
This procedure takes an SXML expression @var{email-item}, which
describes a single email with headers, body, message number, and
attachments, and returns a record of type @code{<email>}.  It is used to
parse the SOAP response of the @code{get-bug-log} operation.  This is
the only way to obtain a value of type @code{<email>}.

It parses the email headers to an association list of headers to values.
It does not process other properties.
@end deffn

@cindex email?, predicate
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} email? @var{record}
Return @code{#t} when @var{record} is an object of type @code{<email>}.
@end deffn

@cindex bug accessor procedures
@cindex bug properties
An email consists of headers, a body, a message number, and an optional
list of attachments.  This module provides accessor procedures to
extract these values from a given object of type @code{<email>}.

@cindex email-headers, accessor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} email-headers @var{email}
Return the parsed RFC822 headers of the @var{email} as an association
list.  The headers are parsed when the object is first created.
@end deffn

@cindex email-body, accessor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} email-body @var{email}
Return the email's body as a string.
@end deffn

@cindex email-msg-num, accessor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} email-msg-num @var{email}
Return the email's message number.  Emails in a bug log can be sorted
using the message number.
@end deffn

@cindex email-attachments, accessor
@deffn {Scheme Procedure} email-attachments @var{email}
Return a list of attachments or the empty list if there are none.
@end deffn


@c *********************************************************************
@node Acknowledgments
@chapter Acknowledgments

Thanks to the following people who contributed to Guile-Debbugs through
bug reports or patches:

@itemize @bullet
@item Your Name Here @email{nobody@@yet}
@end itemize

Also thanks to the people who reviewed Guile Debbugs for hosting on
Savannah and for joining the GNU project.

@itemize @bullet
@item Ineiev @email{ineiev@@gnu.org}
@item Mike Gerwitz @email{mtg@@gnu.org}
@end itemize

Thank you.

@c *********************************************************************
@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl-1.3.texi

@page

@c *********************************************************************
@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node Programming Index
@unnumbered Programming Index
@syncodeindex tp fn
@syncodeindex vr fn
@printindex fn

@bye
